a global gathering in Jordan calls for
Aid to be accelerated into Gaza it comes
more than 8 months into Israel's war but
how is providing more Aid possible
without a ceasefire and what have
Regional countries done to help
Palestinians this is Inside Story
[Music]
hello there and welcome to the program
I'm Laura Kyle Israel's war on Gaza has
killed tens of thousands of Palestinians
and created a humanitarian disaster a
conference in Jordan saw a push by world
powers to get more Aid to those in need
but a major relief effort will likely
depend on a ceasefire and an end to
Israel's blockade of the Gaza Strip so
could Regional Powers be doing more to
help and how serious are the latest
proposals for a ceasefire we'll present
these questions and more to our panel in
just a moment first this report by
Finton
Monahan Jordan and Egypt organized the
biggest Gathering yet aimed at
coordinating a humanitarian response to
the war on Gaza there was a consensus
that Aid must flow but that the only way
to end the crisis is a ceasefire
excellencies the horror must stop it's
high time for a ceasefire
along with the unconditional release of
hostages please raise their hand a US
ceasefire proposal recently got the
backing of the UN Security Council Hamas
wants amendments but says it's engaging
positively with the
plan Israel hasn't publicly accepted the
proposal but its us allies say it is on
board when I met prime minister
Netanyahu uh yesterday in Israel he
reaffirmed his support and his
commitment to bringing this proposal
across the Finish Line as negotiations
drag on the people of Gaza are suffering
more than 37,000 have been killed and
there's famine in many
areas Israel is blocking aid supplies
and is widely accused of using
starvation as a weapon of
War it is necessary for Israel to end
the state of Siege and stop using the
weapon of starvation to punish the
people of the Gaza Strip and to remove
all obstacles to the immediate
sustainable adequate access to
humanitarian and relief Aid to the Gaza
Strip from all
Crossings the conference reflects a
broad agreement in the International
Community that Gaza needs Aid and the
fighting needs to stop but making that
happen will require cooperation from all
sides Vinton Mahan Al jazer for Inside
Story well let's bring in our guests now
and Ender Al Bala in central Gaza Isa
Mana spokesman for the international
Committee of the Red Cross and red
crescent in a man Jordan tahani Mustafa
senior Palestine Analyst at the
international crisis group and ramala in
the occupied West Bank Mustafa bouti
Secretary General of the Palestine
National initiative a very warm welcome
to all of you at tahani everyone in
Jordan agreed that more Aid must get
into Gaza but the question is how does
that happen well that's right at the
conference there was uh the emphasis on
the need for more Aid given the dire
humanitarian situation there um we heard
King Abdullah uh talk about how Jordan
uh would commit to more a sorry air
drops uh the need for some kind of land
Corridor to guarantee the entry of more
sufficient Aid uh which is what we have
not uh been seeing going into Gaza uh
but again you know this is really two
Arab states Egypt and Jordan that are
playing a very delicate PR game in terms
of the logistics in terms of the the the
actual operational elements to make all
of that possible I mean none of that was
really substantially discussed uh what
was more is the fact that the the
pledges that Jordan is making are really
just sticking plasters here uh you know
really ultimately a distraction from the
more you know pressing issue of the fact
that you do actually need land corridors
you have sufficient land corridors but
there was really no emphasis on on how
to actually get that guarantee from
Israel there was no emphasis in the fact
that Israel has not been a good good
faith partner in trying to ensure that
sufficient amounts of Aid go in uh and
neither was there any mention of the
fact that Egypt actually allows Israel
to dictate uh its policy on its Gaza
border danan plenty of points to pick up
on there in this discussion first of all
I just want to get the view on the
ground from the Gaza Strip Hisham to
what extent can this conference improve
the humanitarian situation as it stands
there right
now thank you Laura for having me
yesterday the president of the icrc Mrs
Marana sparich uh delivered two main
asks in The Summit in the DC the first
one was to call for an immediate uh
implementation faithful implementation
of both the spirits and the letters of
the Geneva conventions and uh that part
the conflict are committed to uh
facilitate the implementation of the
agreement that would eventually lead to
First ensure the protection of civilians
secondly um ensure that all those
deprived of their Liberties can be
treated humanly and eventually the um
the full release of the hostages the
second main ask was that a political
agreement that would should come in
effective um must ensure that a
functional humanitarian system would be
put in place considering the fluctuation
of the humanitarian Aid the tremendous
challenges that are facing humanitarian
workers in Gaza to get that urgently
needed assistance into Gaza and deliver
it to the thousands of people who are
desperate for it and also um to ensure
the protection for the humanitarian
workers
uh working across the Gaza St I thought
it was very interesting just to jump in
there because we heard the icrc
president saying that the status quo
cannot hold and yet it seems that people
outside of the country are quite happy
to let things go on as they are but it's
worth remembering isn't it that this is
a situation that is not
sustainable absolutely stat can because
it's very much dangerous people have
been suffering from this fighting since
um since last since the October 7th 2023
for8 months now thousands of people have
been killed vast majority of the G is
now brought to Rubble including
infrastructure homes residential
buildings hospitals and uh they cannot
rebuild their lives as the used to do
after each round of conflict of violence
in the last 15 years this one is
completely unprecedented and we fear
that this dangerous tolerance with the
violations that we witnessed um could
actually
shape the future of uh the next Wars or
Warfare witnessing in this world so it's
it's very much important to achieve a
breakthrough the international committee
Red Cross stands ready to facilitate any
agreement that would be realized once
it's announced and we stand ready to uh
continue providing our humanitarian
assistance okay Mustafa BAGI I mean the
only real obstacle to Aid apart from
Egypt controlling its side of the raff
acrossing as toan said the only other
obstacle is Israel's blockade of Gaza
but what do you make of the fact that
Israel wasn't even at this
conference well of course uh the main
problem is Israel not anybody else and
the main problem is that Israel is
continuing this terrible War these
terrible massacres this terrible
genocide against the Palestinian people
and uh the first thing that one has to
say is that there is no substitute to
land
passages uh all these talks about air
drops and this port that there are many
so many question marks about will not
solve the problem the only way to get
Aid to Gaza is to lift The Siege and
allowed all the land passages from
Jordan and from Egypt to to to to work
and the one from Egypt would not be able
to work as long as the Israeli Army is
occupying the the passage and occupying
the RAF
Crossing but more important in addition
to that even if all land passages are
working this will not alleviate the
problem the problem will not stop
getting deteriorated unless there is a
complete and total ceasefire unless
Israel stops this terrible War we are
talking here not only about the fact
that there are
47,000 Palestinians killed if you
include the 10,000 who are under the
Rabel and with no less than 16,000
children probably and more than 84,000
people injured many of whom will not be
treated because there are no medical
facilities left since Israel destroyed
most of them but in addition to that
even the land passages will not solve
the fact that there is no water supplies
no clean water one of the problems we
have our Medical Teams at Medical relief
has to deal with is that we have a huge
number of people now with infectious
hepatitis an epidemy that spread because
of lack of Clean Water we have to deal
with 1.3 million people who are sick now
with gastro entries with with other
problems and with many people who are
suffering from starvation there are at
least 35 children who are just about to
die because of starvation because of
lack of baby milk because of lack of
support to their families so I don't
think the solution will happen unless
the world Community exercises immediate
sanctions on Israel okay to force before
we go there before we go to that let's
look at the ceasefire prospects because
as we just before we were going to
record this program we did hear from the
US Secretary Anthony uh blinken
Secretary of uh state of isra sorry the
US Secretary of State Anthony blinkin in
K alongside the Qatari prime minister
they were speaking because they are
looking to bring both sides back to the
table talking about Biden's ceasefire
proposal the qari Prime Minister said
that he senses a shift in the conflict
toan do you agree that there is a shift
right now in the conflict and that a
ceasefire Could Happen relatively
soon unfortunately I don't share that
optimism uh I think at the moment we are
still facing uh two sides that have uh
two mutually exclusive demands here
Hamas want to see the withdrawal uh of
Israel from Gaza they want to see uh a
total cessation of
hostilities a permanent ceasefire uh
before all other conditions can then be
be worked out uh on the other side
you've got Israel that is still going
full maximalist in terms of its
objectives of destroying Hamas not just
militarily but as an administrative body
uh a political social entity uh which
you know so far we know it has not been
able to qualify where Israel has claimed
to destroy Hamas it has managed to
reestablish itself as both a military
entity and as an administrative body so
unfortunately uh I think it's very
unlikely that we're going to see a
ceasefire anytime soon it's just it's
completely unrealistic and we I mean
we've even seen that in terms of Israel
not even being able to actually we've
seen Hamas come out and say that it's
willing to accept that proposal on the
condition that it gets serious
guarantees from either Israel or or its
us mediator but we haven't seen anything
similar from the Israeli side if
anything we've seen statements that have
completely undermined this proposal well
tan let me put it to you then if you
don't see a ceasefire on the horizon
anytime soon and Israel is not at the
table when talking about an an urgent
need to an increase of humanitarian Aid
what is the point of having a conference
like we had in
Jordan I mean this is two two uh Arab
regimes that are dealing or or playing a
very delicate PR game here at home uh
Jordan is in the Jordanian regime itself
is in a very precarious situation on the
one hand it has tried to balance its
rhetoric with regards to this war it its
image in terms of providing things like
air drops and Aid and medical convoys
but at the same time the fact that
Jordan has been able to provide in some
ways some diplomatic cover for for what
Israel has done in Gaza the fact that it
is still um in many ways engaging in
economic and security ties with with
Israel has not been lost on its
population at all uh and this is also
coming against the backdrop of a time
where the Jordanian regime even prior to
the 7th of October was in a real
frictitious precarious uh uh
relationship uh with many jordanians uh
and so this this really is just a matter
of public postering and the same thing
with uh with Egypt Egypt is again in a
very very delicate situation here uh
where public sentiment at home is just
simply not jelling with Egypt's foreign
policy Hasam I want to pick up on uh
what is actually happening inside Gaza
we saw the Raffa Crossing closing about
a month ago go and that blocked off an
enormous amount of Aid and really made
delivery of Aid across the Gaza Strip
incredibly difficult how now does it get
in and how is it distributed throughout
Gaza thank you for this important
question uh since the start of the
Israeli military operation in Rafa uh in
in the on the sixth of of May um we have
witnessed a significant decline in the
amount of humanitarian Aid entering Gaza
and eventually reaching the people in
need especially after closing theak
Crossing which was the main gateway for
not only for the humanitarian Aid uh
that's entering Gaza bya trucks uh but
also with the humanitarian workers
including surgeons doctors nurses
Specialists and infrastructure uh it
also prevented uh many casualties and
and and and and patients who were
entitled to receive medical treatment
abroad because it's not available in
Gaza and they are now in much vulnerable
situation so they are actually in um in
facing uh the imminent risk of of losing
their lives because they're not
receiving that treatment um also we are
receiving reports coming from norn Gaza
Strip that people are still struggling
with finding sufficient amount of food
and they are um sleeping on empty
stomachs um this has tremendous uh uh
impacts on their uh on their Healthcare
on their and their well-being as well
there are many casual and Northern G
strip and like barely functioning
hospitals who are scheduled for
surgeries that are not performed because
there's no capability of doing that and
they need to be transferred to sou Gaza
Strip so there is no efficient
humanitarian system at the moment that
would allow urgently readed response
including health care including clean
water including hot meals to be uh to
reach the people in need and this has to
change immediately not just in the
framework of political agreement but
this is more of a legal obligation on
parties to the conflict and Israel as
occupying power must ensure that
civilians um reach uh all Necessities
that are needed for their own Survival
including food including water including
healthare and on top of all Safety and
Security in addition to that
humanitarian workers have been living
and facing what the majority of the
people are facing in Gaza our icrc staff
members are living literally intense and
they are challenged with the daily
challenges that are faced by uh facing
the whole population and yet they start
to they they show up every day to work
but there as as the ICC president
mentioned yesterday the the entire
humanitarian system is being pushed to a
point of collapse if there is no
breakthrough uh uh foreen in the very
very near future Mustafa when you look
at what can be done we know that Israel
has taken control of the Palestinian
side of Rafer it's also taken control of
the Philadelphia Corridor this buffer
zone between Egypt and G now that was a
red line for Egypt so why haven't we
seen Egypt act on it put more leverage
on
Israel well I don't know what the
Egyptians should do but uh it's not just
Egypt I think it's the whole world that
is not doing what it should do uh let's
remember that the icj the international
court of justice decided and made a
resolution or an order as a matter of
fact to Israel to stop the military
operation in Russ
this was never fulfilled Israel
continues the attacks on RAF and they
continue the attacks in the north and
they continue the attacks in the center
there is no safe place in in all of Gaza
and uh as I said as long as this war
continues this this this this
humanitarian situation will continue to
deteriorate and that's why I think now
we have to look at the real picture I
think Hamas has accepted the UN Security
Council resolution they've even accepted
practically Biden's proposal which he
claimed was an Israeli proposal it is
Israel that did not accept them yet if
we look I want to jump in again Mustafa
because if we look if we zoom in a
little bit on the region yes the world
has failed to take Israel to task but
one would expect more of the Arab
nations in particular because they stand
on the side of the Palestinians but what
exactly have they done to help
them in my opinion all Arab countries
and all Islamic countries should start
by imposing immediate sanctions on
Israel and uh this call for sanctions
should go should go also worldwide but
yes it is the responsibility of the Arab
countries and and Islamic countries in
particular who are the brothers of the
Palestinian people and who say that they
are supporting the Palestinian CA to
start by themselves in my opinion
Netanyahu will not stop without
sanctions
he will not stop because his goal and
his aim is to extend this worldall till
till maybe the end of the year hoping
that Trump will be elected and then he
will get much more support from the
United States of America and he has to
be stopped and he can be stopped only by
imposing sanctions on him or threatening
him with sanctions okay but this whole
humanitarian terrible crisis will not
stop unless the ceasefire is there but
let me just one last point it is must it
is very important to clarify that the
Palestinian side accepted the UN
Security Council resolution and engaged
in negotiating about it it is the
Israeli side that still rejects it
absolutely and we we we'll have to wait
in the coming days to hear more on the
Israeli response to that ceasefire toan
I just want to pick up on the sanctions
issue so far we've only really seen
turkey taking action against Israel
cutting some of its trade or most of its
trade with Israel why are we not seeing
Jordan doing that why are we not seeing
Egypt doing that or the Gulf Nations why
so little
action I mean these countries are very
dependent if you talk about Jordan and
Egypt these are countries that are
entirely dependent on on primarily
Western Aid uh they simply don't have
the capacity to to take a stance even if
they could uh Jordan is a really good
example of that where Jordan doesn't
even have entire sovereignty over its uh
Land and Sea space the fact that it has
signed numerous memorandum deals with
the US for instance has given the US
practically free reign to to use Jordan
as a as a military base to however it
sees fit which is what we have actually
seen um in the last few months when we
had the Iran Israel um scuffle where uh
effectively it was largely uh us and and
and the Israelis that were using their
air defense systems to to shoot down
missiles and drones and what was worse
was that they were doing it over
populated areas you know places like the
the administrative Capital here um you
know that has not again that has not
been lost on their populations the fact
that these countries have absolutely no
capacity to take a serious stance if
anything in some cases countries like
Jordan and even Egypt had provided the
Diplomatic cover very early on when uh
you had the Arab League trying to uh
take a resolution of of cutting uh all
economic diplomatic and and security
ties with Israel it was these countries
that had normalization deals and were
also in uh dependent on Western Aid that
blocked that resolution at the start of
this Onslaught uh and since then they
have not tried to leverage any of their
normalization deals to to try and uh
push for anything positive for the
Palestinians in the last eight months
hhan when you talk to people there to
what extent is there a sense of
Abandonment by not in the region but the
World At
Large you can hear that in every um
every moment uh you interact with anyone
in Gaza despite their age their sex
their background um everyone in Gaza
wants to stop this war everyone wants to
go back to their homes even if they have
no home left even if their entire
neighborhood is destroyed they just
would would go back and live even in
aemp but they just want this to come to
an end and uh there's a general sense of
abandon
abandonment uh indeed uh and uh this has
created even extra pressure on the
humanitarian workers that who have been
shouldering responsibility of um making
sure that people receive the aid that
that they are in need for and they are
entitled to receive um from our
experience we have been in Israel and
the occupied territory since
1967 and we have been part of this
community for decades uh what we have
witnessed since the last since since
last October is completely unprecedented
and from the icrc experience in armed
conflicts we ABS we are absolutely sure
that humanitarian solution cannot be the
solution for ending the humanitarian
suffering military actions cannot
achieve that as well the politic
agreements could eventually put an end
to this Bloodshed so we are not involved
in the political discussions or
negotiations as humanitarian
intermediary however we remain fully
ready to start implementing any
agreement once it's realized between the
you know the departs the confli and this
is part of the effort that the ICP is
actually pursuing um including its
president uh with both you know we have
spoken directly to both Hamas and Israel
we have spoken to third party countries
and authorities who have influence on
both um but I can assure you that people
cannot continue to survive they cannot
live on the survival mode for for any
longer they have invested everything in
their capacity and just as a reminder
Gaza has faced the brunt of 16 years of
restrictions on the movement good of
people for 16 years the amount of the
level of um um um food insecurity for
example at population level has exceeded
80% then October 7th happened so people
could not even afford to rent a transort
transportation or a bus or a car or even
a drag you know C by donkeys to move
their belongings because they have to go
to a safer place after receiving
evacuation orders they have been living
like that for for eight months now and
there's no way any human being can
continue living like that so we cannot
actually keep you know bidding on how
people can cope and mitigate any longer
Mustafa the Palestinian president abass
there in ramala he was at the Jordanian
conference but otherwise he's been
largely sidelined throughout this
conflict how dangerous is that for
Palestinians at large I'm talking about
uh those in Gaza but also in the
occupied West
Bank well West Bank itself is subjected
now to terrible atrocities by Israel I
mean in the last 48 hours the Israeli
Army killed 14 Palestinians in different
parts of the West Bank and they continue
their attacks and uh the life of a
Palestinian is is worth nothing for
Israelis whether in Gaza or in the West
Bank but the Palestinian leadership is
also facing a grave challenge because
Israel and the United States of America
to some extent and some other countries
are try trying to take away from
Palestinians their right of
self-representation and the o leadership
can only save the situation by accepting
our demand of creating a unified
Palestinian leadership within the ranks
of the PLO including everybody what the
world must see and should see is a
unified Palestinian front a unified
Palestinian
leadership and a new interim government
that should be a consent National
consensus government that should be
interim and that should promise the
people to organize elections once once
this war is over one of the very most
and most important issues here is that
the Palestinians have the right to
choose their leaders freely and
democratically and it is not Israel or
United States or any other country that
have the right to impose on us who
should lead us about I'm talking about
next I'm I'm just going to bring the the
conversation just back to the president
if I'm apologies for interrupting we
just got time for one more question I
just want to put it to tahani in the
absence of a ceasefire you pretty
pessimistic about getting a little
earlier how does this urgently needed
Aid get into Gaza because something's
got to get
in well look Aid organizations
themselves have said it King Abdullah
himself said it uh there is no
substitute for land corridors you have
them they are there uh the problem is
Israel uh is is the one dictating uh
what goes in and what goes out so unless
there is actually any serious
substantial pressure from Israel rather
than these uh kind of distractive um
sticking plaster mechanisms of air drops
and and and trying to deliver Aid
through the sea where already we've seen
that it is in completely inefficient has
cost lives Palestinian lives has not
delivered anywhere near the the required
amounts of Aid and has actually been far
more costly um there really is no
substitute to that there really needs to
be pressure on Israel here there needs
to be some sort of concerted
International effort to get Israel to
allow Goods sufficient amounts of goods
to go in through existing land Crossings
okay there we have to leave our
discussion today many thanks to all our
guests for joining us Hisham Mana tahani
Mustafa and Mustafa
barouti and thank you too for watching
you can see the program again anytime by
visiting our website that's
aljazeera.com for further discussion do
go to our Facebook page that's
facebook.com/ AJ insid story you can
also join the conversation on XR handers
at AJ insid story from me Laura Kyle and
the whole team here it's bye for now
[Music]